# Inflation-of-the-Parachute
Inflation of the Parachute
A parachute is made from thin, lightweight fabric, support tapes and suspension lines. The lines are usually
gathered through cloth loops or metal connector links at the ends of several strong straps called risers. The risers
in turn are attached to the harness containing the load.
Deployment systems
Freefall deployed parachutes are pulled out of their containers by a smaller parachute called a pilot chute.
A way of deploying a parachute directly after leaving the aircraft is the static line. One end of the static line is
attached to the aircraft, and the other to the deployment system of the parachute container.
Types of parachutes
Round parachutes
An American paratrooper using an MC1-1C series 'round' parachute
Round parachutes, which are pure drag devices (i.e., they provide no lift like the ram-air types), are used in
military, emergency and cargo applications. These have large dome-shaped canopies made from a single layer
of cloth. Some skydivers call them "jellyfish 'chutes" because they look like dome-shaped jellyfish. Rounds are
rarely used by skydivers these days. The first round parachutes were simple, flat circulars, but suffered from
instability, so most modern round parachutes are some sort of conical or parabolic.
Some round parachutes are steerable, but not to the extent of the ram-air parachutes. An example of a steerable
round is provided in the picture of the paratrooper's canopy; it is not ripped or torn but has a "T-U cut". This
kind of cut allows air to escape from the back of the canopy, providing the parachute with limited forward
speed. This gives the jumpers the ability to steer the parachute and to face into the wind to slow down the
horizontal speed for the landing. 
Annular & pull down apex parachutes
A variation on the round parachute is the pull down apex parachute invented by a Frenchman named LeMoigne
-- referred to as a Para-Commander-type canopy in some circles, after the first model of the type. It is a round
parachute, but with suspension lines to the canopy apex that apply load there and pull the apex closer to the
load, distorting the round shape into a somewhat flattened or lenticular shape.
Often these designs have the fabric removed from the apex to open a hole through which air can exit, giving the
canopy an annular geometry. They also have decreased horizontal drag due to their flatter shape, and when
combined with rear-facing vents, can have considerable forward speed around 10 mph (15 km/h).
Ribbon and ring parachutes
Ribbon and ring parachutes have similarities to annular designs and they can be designed to open at speeds as
high as Mach 2 (two times the speed of sound). These have a ring-shaped canopy, often with a large hole in the
center to release the pressure. Sometimes the ring is broken into ribbons connected by ropes to leak air even
more. The large leaks lower the stress on the parachute so it does not burst when it opens.
Often a high speed parachute slows a load down and then pulls out a lower speed parachute. The mechanism to
sequence the parachutes is called a "delayed release" or "pressure detent release" depending on whether it
releases based on time, or the reduction in pressure as the load slows down.
Ram-air parachutes
Most modern parachutes are self-inflating "ram-air" airfoils known as a Para foil that provide control of speed
and direction similar to Para gliders. Para gliders have much greater lift and range, but parachutes are designed
to handle, spread and mitigate the stresses of deployment at terminal velocity. All ram-air Para foils have two
layers of fabric; top and bottom, connected by airfoil-shaped fabric ribs. The space between the two fabric
layers fills with high pressure air from vents that face forward on the leading edge of the airfoil. The fabric is
shaped and the parachute lines trimmed under load such that the ballooning fabric inflates into an airfoil shape.
A U.S. NAVY display jumper landing a 'square' ram-air parachute 
Reserves
Paratroopers and sports parachutists carry two parachutes. The primary parachute is called a main parachute, the
second, a reserve parachute. The jumper uses the reserve if the main parachute fails to operate correctly.
Reserve parachutes were introduced in World War II by the US Army paratroopers, and are now almost
universal. For human jumpers, only emergency bail-out rigs have a single parachute and these tend to be of
round design on older designs, while modern PEPs (i.e P124A/Aviator) contain large, docile ram-air parachutes.
Deployment
Reserve parachutes usually have a ripcord deployment system, but most modern main parachutes used by sports
parachutists use a form of hand deployed pilot chute. A ripcord system pulls a closing pin (sometimes multiple
pins) which releases a spring-loaded pilot chute and opens the container, the pilot chute is propelled into the air
stream by its spring then uses the force generated by passing air to extract a deployment bag containing the
parachute canopy, to which it is attached via a bridle. A hand deployed pilot chute, once thrown into the air
stream, pulls a closing pin on the pilot chute bridle to open the container, then the same force extracts the
deployment bag. There are variations on hand deployed pilot chutes but the system described is the more
common throw-out system. Only the hand deployed pilot chute may be collapsed automatically after
deployment by a kill line reducing the in-flight drag of the pilot chute on the main canopy. Reserves on the
other hand do not retain their pilot chutes after deployment. The reserve deployment bag and pilot chute are not
connected to the canopy in a reserve system, this is known as a free bag configuration and the components are
often lost during a reserve deployment. Occasionally a pilot chute does not generate enough force to either pull
the pin or extract the bag, causes may be that the pilot chute is caught in the turbulent wake of the jumper (the
"burble"), the closing loop holding the pin is too tight, or the pilot chute is generating insufficient force, this
effect is known as "pilot chute hesitation" and if it does not clear it can lead to a total malfunction requiring
reserve deployment.
Paratroopers' main parachutes are usually deployed by static lines which release the parachute yet retain the
deployment bag which contains the parachute without relying on a pilot chute for deployment. In this
configuration the deployment bag is known as a direct bag system and the deployment is rapid, consistent and
reliable. This kind of deployment is also used by student skydivers going through a static line progression, a
kind of student program.
Using the modeling process, build a mathematical model for the opening of the parachutes discussed
above. We are concerned with how the parachute inflates. Use your model to explain how the geometry
of the folding of the parachute affects the inflation and then discuss how we might affect the rate of
inflation of the parachute. 
